Update Query documentation (#1799)
aspnet/EntityFramework.Docs: entity-framework/core/querying/client-eval.md

---
title: Client vs. Server Evaluation - EF Core
author: smitpatel
ms.date: 10/03/2019
ms.assetid: 8b6697cc-7067-4dc2-8007-85d80503d123
uid: core/querying/client-eval
---
# Client vs. Server Evaluation

> To evaluate query on server as much as possible, Entity Framework Core converts parts of the query to parameters, which it can evaluate on client side. Rest of the query with generated parameters is given to database providers to determine what should be equivalent database query to do evaluation on the server. EF Core supports partial client evaluation in top-level projection (essentially, the last call to `Select()`). If parts of query in top-level projection can't be translated to server, EF Core will fetch required data from server and evaluate it on client. If EF Core detects expression, which can't be translated to server in any other place, then it throws runtime exception. See [how query works](xref:core/querying/how-query-works) to understand how EF Core determines what can't be translated to server.

Author: I don't see much value in specifying performance. This is doc about EF behavior. We can mention but not describe.

> To evaluate query on server as much as possible, Entity Framework Core converts parts of the query to parameters, which it can evaluate on client side. Rest of the query with generated parameters is given to database providers to determine what should be equivalent database query to do evaluation on the server. EF Core supports partial client evaluation in top-level projection (essentially, the last call to `Select()`). If parts of query in top-level projection can't be translated to server, EF Core will fetch required data from server and evaluate it on client. If EF Core detects expression, which can't be translated to server in any other place, then it throws runtime exception. See [how query works](xref:core/querying/how-query-works) to understand how EF Core determines what can't be translated to server.

Author: Also there are queries where client eval would be more performant. :trollface:

> To evaluate query on server as much as possible, Entity Framework Core converts parts of the query to parameters, which it can evaluate on client side. Rest of the query with generated parameters is given to database providers to determine what should be equivalent database query to do evaluation on the server. EF Core supports partial client evaluation in top-level projection (essentially, the last call to `Select()`). If parts of query in top-level projection can't be translated to server, EF Core will fetch required data from server and evaluate it on client. If EF Core detects expression, which can't be translated to server in any other place, then it throws runtime exception. See [how query works](xref:core/querying/how-query-works) to understand how EF Core determines what can't be translated to server.

Author: Change it little bit to simplify.

> To evaluate query on server as much as possible, Entity Framework Core converts parts of the query to parameters, which it can evaluate on client side. Rest of the query with generated parameters is given to database providers to determine what should be equivalent database query to do evaluation on the server. EF Core supports partial client evaluation in top-level projection (essentially, the last call to `Select()`). If parts of query in top-level projection can't be translated to server, EF Core will fetch required data from server and evaluate it on client. If EF Core detects expression, which can't be translated to server in any other place, then it throws runtime exception. See [how query works](xref:core/querying/how-query-works) to understand how EF Core determines what can't be translated to server.

Reviewer: > I don't see much value in specifying performance

??

Performance is one of the two (extremely) major reasons we don't have client evaluation anymore... It seems critical for the understanding of what client vs. server evaluation is?

> To evaluate query on server as much as possible, Entity Framework Core converts parts of the query to parameters, which it can evaluate on client side. Rest of the query with generated parameters is given to database providers to determine what should be equivalent database query to do evaluation on the server. EF Core supports partial client evaluation in top-level projection (essentially, the last call to `Select()`). If parts of query in top-level projection can't be translated to server, EF Core will fetch required data from server and evaluate it on client. If EF Core detects expression, which can't be translated to server in any other place, then it throws runtime exception. See [how query works](xref:core/querying/how-query-works) to understand how EF Core determines what can't be translated to server.

Author: I don't see value in specifying this
> This is important for performance: the server performs the work, possibly using indexes for efficiency, and only sends the results back to the client, minimizing network bandwidth needs.

Anyone using databases understands that. The intent of this page is not to empasize that in my mind.

> As a general rule, Entity Framework Core attempts to evaluate query on server as much as possible. EF Core converts parts of the query to parameters, which it can evaluate on client side. Rest of the query with generated parameters is given to database providers to determine what should be equivalent database query to do evaluation on the server. EF Core supports partial client evaluation in top-level projection (essentially, the last call to `Select()`). If parts of query in top-level projection can't be translated to server, EF Core will fetch required data from server and evaluate it on client. If EF Core detects expression, which can't be translated to server in any other place, then it throws runtime exception. See [how query works](xref:core/querying/how-query-works) to understand how EF Core determines what can't be translated to server.

Author: also found another missing `the`

> [!NOTE]
> Prior to version 3.0, Entity Framework Core supported client evaluation anywhere in the query. For more information, see the [previous versions section](#previous-versions).

> ## Client evaluation in top-level projection

Author: Went with the since there is only one top-level projection. It's not incorrect just bit ambiguous.

> [!TIP]
> You can view this article's [sample](https://github.com/aspnet/EntityFramework.Docs/tree/master/samples/core/Querying) on GitHub.

> In the following example, a helper method is used to standardize URLs for blogs, which are returned from a SQL Server database. Since the SQL Server provider has no insight into how this method is implemented, it isn't possible to translate it into SQL. All other aspects of the query are evaluated in the database, but passing the returned `URL` through this method is done on the client.

Author: Title makes it clear that it is in top-level projection.

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Querying/ClientEval/Sample.cs#ClientProjection)]

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Querying/ClientEval/Sample.cs#ClientMethod)]

> ## Unsupported client evaluation

Author: I don't agree with this reasoning. A client code worked in projection failed in where. Users would have question why that happens.

While client evaluation is useful, it can result in poor performance sometimes. Consider the following query, in which the helper method is now used in a where filter. Because filter can't be applied in the database, all the data needs to be pulled into memory to apply filter on the client. Based on the amount of data on the server and the filter, client evaluation could result in poor performance. So Entity Framework Core blocks such client evaluation and throws a runtime exception.

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Querying/ClientEval/Sample.cs#ClientWhere)]

## Explicit client evaluation

User may need to force into client evaluation explicitly in certain cases like following

> - Data is small so that doing evaluation on client doesn't cause huge performance penalty.

Author: You can disagree with it but our users don't. Our users are indeed using `AsEnumerable` to cause client eval and it is part of our exception message too.

> - Data is small so that doing evaluation on client doesn't cause huge performance penalty.

Reviewer: I'm talking about your logic. The fact that something doesn't cause a huge perf penalty is not, in itself, a justification to use it. You use it because you have no choice or because there's some other benefit.

> - Data is small so that doing evaluation on client doesn't cause huge performance penalty.

Author: Again that is not true. It is simple cost vs benefit analysis. If I have table of 40 rows and a client filter function, I can also convert the client function to a database function and use UDF to map it. I can get best performance at the expense of spending ours to generate UDF when I can just do client eval because it is just cheaper and does not cause huge penalty.

- LINQ operator being used has no server-side translation.

In such cases, user can explicitly opt into client evaluation by calling methods like `AsEnumerable` (or `AsAsyncEnumerable` for async).

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Querying/ClientEval/Sample.cs#ExplicitClientEval)]

## Potential memory leak in client evaluation

> Since query translation and compilation are expensive, EF Core caches the compiled query plan. The cached delegate may use client code while doing client evaluation of top-level projection. EF Core generates parameters for client parts of the tree, to reuse the query plan by replacing parameter values. But certain constants in expression tree can be converted to parameters. If the cached delegate contains such constants, then those objects can't be garbage collected as they're still being referenced. If such object contains DbContext or other services inside it, then it could cause memory usage of the app to grow over time. It's generally sign of memory leak. EF Core throws exception whenever it comes across constants of type that can't be mapped using current database providers. Common causes and their solutions are as follows:

Author: I don't think users are ever going to understand it anyway. :trollface: 

Important point is 3 solutions which describes what to do when we throw exception.

> Since query translation and compilation are expensive, EF Core caches the compiled query plan. The cached delegate may use client code while doing client evaluation of top-level projection. EF Core generates parameters for client parts of the tree, to reuse the query plan by replacing parameter values. But certain constants in expression tree can be converted to parameters. If the cached delegate contains such constants, then those objects can't be garbage collected as they're still being referenced. If such object contains DbContext or other services inside it, then it could cause memory usage of the app to grow over time. It's generally sign of memory leak. EF Core throws exception whenever it comes across constants of type that can't be mapped using current database providers. Common causes and their solutions are as follows:

Reviewer: This needs simple code samples instead of a wall of text.

> Since query translation and compilation is expensive, by default, EF Core caches compiled query plan. With client evaluation allowed in the top projection, the cached delegate can use client code. In most cases, EF Core generates parameters for client parts of the tree so that their values can be replaced when reusing the query plan. But with certain constants in expression tree, it cannot be converted to parameters. If the client code contains such constants then those objects cannot be garbage collected. If such object contains DbContext or other services inside it then it could cause memory usage of the app to grow over time. In order to avoid potential memory leak, EF Core throws exception whenever it encounter constants of type which cannot be mapped in current database providers. Common causes and their solutions are as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since query translation and compilation is expensive, by default, EF Core caches the compiled query plan. With client evaluation allowed in the top projection, the cached delegate can use client code. In most cases, EF Core generates parameters for client parts of the tree so that their values can be replaced when reusing the query plan. But certain constants in expression tree cannot be converted to parameters. If the client code contains such constants then those objects cannot be garbage collected as they would still be referenced from the cached query plan. If such object contains DbContext or other services inside it then it could cause memory usage of the app to grow over time. In order to avoid potential memory leak, EF Core throws an exception whenever it encounters constants of type which cannot be mapped using the current database provider. Common causes and their solutions are as follows:
```

> Since query translation and compilation is expensive, by default, EF Core caches compiled query plan. With client evaluation allowed in the top projection, the cached delegate can use client code. In most cases, EF Core generates parameters for client parts of the tree so that their values can be replaced when reusing the query plan. But with certain constants in expression tree, it cannot be converted to parameters. If the client code contains such constants then those objects cannot be garbage collected. If such object contains DbContext or other services inside it then it could cause memory usage of the app to grow over time. In order to avoid potential memory leak, EF Core throws exception whenever it encounter constants of type which cannot be mapped in current database providers. Common causes and their solutions are as follows:

Reviewer 3: I wonder if we should avoid the word *constant* here.

Author: What should we call it?

Author: ideas?

Reviewer 3: Not sure, but I think to most users would think of the `const` keyword.
*references to fields and properties* gets a little closer, but probably isn't right

Author: reference to "this" is the only one which causes issue.

- **Using instance method**: When using instance methods in client projection, the expression tree contains constant of the instance. If your method doesn't use any data from instance, consider making the method static. If you need instance data in the method body, then pass specific data as an argument to the method.
- **Passing constant argument to method**: This case arises generally by using `this` in argument to client method. Consider splitting argument in to multiple scalar arguments, which can be mapped by database provider.
- **Other constants**: If constant is seen in any other case, then you can evaluate if constant is needed in processing. If it's necessary to have the constant or if you can't use solution to above cases, then create a local variable to store the value and use local variable in the query. EF Core will convert it to parameter.

## Previous versions

> The following section applies to EF Core versions before 3.0.

Author: We need to determine the formatting on how to describe behavior in previous versions. I am keeping this as is for now.

EF Core supported client evaluation in any part query that's why queries similar to one posted in [Unsupported client evaluation](#unsupported-client-evaluation) section worked correctly. But it caused performance issue without users noticing. To notify users that query was being evaluated on client, EF Core logged client evaluation warning. For more information on viewing logging output, see [Logging](xref:core/miscellaneous/logging).

> Optionally EF Core allowed to change default behavior to throw exception or do nothing when doing client evaluation except for projection. The exception throwing would make it similar to the behavior in 3.0. To change the behavior, you need to configure warnings while setting up the options for your context - typically in `DbContext.OnConfiguring`, or in `Startup.cs` if you're using ASP.NET Core.

Author: There is also ignoring warnings rather than logging which above paragraph does not cover. ConfigureWarnings has Throw/Log/Ignore options.
